Let's just get started.
The first category is the event loop, just
to make sure we're all on the same page.
The event loop, so we have a very simple
script, we're just console logging 1 and
then we have a function,
myFunction that we then invoke.
So first console log(1) gets
added to the call stack.
We log(1) and returns a value, we're done.
Then we're invoking myFunction,
myFunction gets added to the call stack,
this in turn, invokes console log(2), 2
gets added or gets logged to the console,
and then got popped off the call stack.
This is very straightforward
we kind of know how it works.
We'll talk more about the other components
of the event loop in just a moment.
But then we also have setTimeout, and
setTimeout works a bit different because
this is a web API that we can use to
schedule the callback that we pass to the
macro-test queue after a certain delay.
And this is an important
thing to remember,
cuz it's not that we're delaying when
it gets pushed to the call stack,
it's when it gets pushed
to the task queue.
Again, we'll kind of see how
this works in just a moment.
So in this case,
we have the setTimeout, and
we have a callback function that is just
logging 1 with a zero millisecond delay.
And this is kind of a tricky one,
cuz you're like, it's zero milliseconds,
would it just run it right away,
that's not really the case.
So setTimeout gets pushed
on the call stack.
And this in turn, pushes that callback
to the web API's like timer API.
So we have a very, well,
zero millisecond delay, but
it's still kind of on the next step.
So this pushes it to
the microtask queue or
just the task queue,
whatever you wanna call it.
And then on the next iteration or
the next loop,
it'll actually push it to the call stack,
which then logs(1).
So you can see now that if there
were other functions in that script,
it wouldn't have blocked the call stack.
So if this was something that might have
run later, we can just keep running our
script without blocking any of that or
the execution.
Then we also have Microtasks, and this is
a bit different because when we invoke
queueMicrotasks or any other parts of
the code that would create a microtask and
just pushes it to the microtask
queue immediately.
And then again, once the call stack is
empty, it pushes it to the call stack and
then logs(1).
One important thing to remember
about microtasks is that they get
executed before the tasks
in the regular task queue.
So in this case,
it just keeps checking, all right,
are there any microtasks to process
instead of the task that's queued there?
Yes there are, so then only afterwards
will it actually process the tasks.
So these are all microtasks,
and there aren't any, or
these are the most common ones.
So first, we have the asyncFunction, and
the code after the await keyword
is put it in a microtask or
like process as a microtask.
And this is something important to
remember that once we have the await
keyword the rest of the body
will be executed as a microtask.
Same for the then callback catch and
finally, callback functions.
Of course also Q microtasks, mutation
observer, and the process next tick.
So just remember that these are all
microtasks, not regular tasks.
So then we have the very first question
to put the logs in the correct order.
So we have the promise resolve, the then
callback, queueMicrotasks, setTimeout,
a regular console.log, a new Promise
constructor, and then the asyncFunction.
So it's up to you to put these in the
correct order, how you think that they'll
be logged, and then afterward,
we'll see if you have it right.
All right, so the correct order
would be 4, 5, 6, 1, 2, 3.
So first, let's just see what
happens when we execute the script.
So the very first thing is
that we call promise.resolve.
And this just gets added to the call
stack, cuz it's a regular invocation and
it's an immediately resolved promise.
So the then callback is, or
the then function, it's pushed to the call
stack right away, which then
schedules that microtask, cuz it's
the callback to the then chain method,
as we just saw, that is a microtask.
Then we call queueMicrotask.
So that queueMicrotask is
added to the call stack, but
that then schedules that microtask,
which is console.log(2).
Then we have the setTimeout,
gets added to the call stack, and
that schedules the callback and
the Web API.
Which on the next tick gets pushed to the
regular task queue, and at the same time,
console.log(4) is pushed
to the call stack.
This is just a regular function, so
four is logged as the very first value.
Then on the next line, we have the new
Promise constructor, and the body of new
Promise is just executed synchronously,
and that can be a bit counterintuitive.
Cuz a lot of people think that the new
Promise constructor body is also run
asynchronously, that's not the case.
It's only like that the result will
execute the rest asynchronously.
We have this is just pushed to
the call stack, which then log(5).
So the second log is five.
And then we have the immediately
invoked asyncFunction.
And again, also here,
that body is just run synchronously.
It's only the awaited value where
the asynchronous part kind of begins,
we'll also look at that in just a second,
but this is just the first thing.
So console.log(6) and
6 gets logged to the console.
So now, the call stack is empty.
So the first thing to happens is that
the microtask queue gets checked and
the first task there gets
added to the call stack.
So the callback for the then method,
so call or console.log(1),
1 gets logged and the same for 2,
which was that queue microtask callback.
So the next one is 2.
And then there's nothing
in the microtask queue.
There was something in the task queue, so
the thing is pushed to the call stack and
logged logs 3.
So that's kind of this whole
event loop order, I guess.
Question number 2,
which of the following are not considered
microtasks in the JavaScript's event loop?
Is it script loading,
setTimeout callback, mousemove events,
requestAnimationFrame callback,
UI rendering, the then callback,
the new Promise executor function,
or fetch calls?
So there can be multiple or all of them.
The answer is pretty much all of them.
It's just a then callback that
is considered a microtask,
cuz we just saw here at that it's just the
asyncFunction after the await keyword when
the promise actually resolved or the rest
of the asyncFunction body is a microtask.
Or the callback pester,
then catch finally, Q microtask and
mutation observer, or next tick, but
everything else is just a regular task.
Ready for next question?
Again, putting the logs in
the correct order, but this time,
we have an asyncFunction.
In which, in the body, we log 1 then we
have a new Promise constructor logs (2) or
waiting a new Promise with a set
timeout in it and then resolve.
And then we have another new
Promise constructor that logs 4 and
immediately called asyncFunction in there,
where we're awaiting the asyncFunction
that we just had above that.
We have a then change method.
And then we're just logging
eight in the normal script.
So in what order would
they get logged [LAUGH]?
Please never write JavaScript like this,
by the way, this is the worst.
And the right order is 4,
5, 1, 2, 8, 7, 6, 3.
So let's see why.
First, we just have a regular function
declaration so nothing runs yet.
Then the very first thing is
that new Promise constructor.
So that gets pushed to the call stack, and
then the very first thing in
its body is the console.log(4).
So, the first thing that gets logged is 4.
It gets popped off the call stack, and
then we have the immediately
invoked asyncFunction.
So this body runs right away, so
console.log(5), so 5 is the next one.
And then we await asyncFunction, but
that means the asyncFunction is still
executed pretty much synchronously.
So this body still runs right away.
So the very first thing in this
asyncFunction body is console.log(1).
So the next one that gets logged is 1.
Then we have the new Promise constructor,
and again,
the new promise constructor's executor
function is executed right away.
So this log(2).
Then we await new Promise, but that means
that we're still executing that awaited
promise, so
we can have that new Promise constructor.
And the very first thing on
this line is you set timeout.
So this callback's added to the timer API,
and
then on the next tick,
it all gets pushed to the task queue.
And then we resolve that promise.
Now, one thing about
asyncFunctions is that,
after that awaited value has resolved,
that's when the rest of the asyncFunction
is pushed or
put in that micro task that we just saw.
But you probably know that
if we don't return or
explicitly return a value from a function,
it implicitly returns undefined.
So, even though we're
not returning anything,
that asyncFunction is still
an output in the microtask queue.
But it's just the rest that
we still had to execute,
even though that's
the implicit return undefined.
But that also means that we're
awaiting asyncFunction here, but
it hasn't resolved yet,
it's still pending.
So the async body here, or
asyncFunction, is then paused,
cuz there's nothing,
like the promise hasn't resolved yet.
So that's just something important to
remember with asyncFunction is that once
the awaited value is still pending,
that entire function is paused.
And JavaScript itself will then
return to the outer scope,
which in this case is resolve for
the new Promise constructor.
So this promise resolves now, which means
that the then callback is executed.
So then gets pushed to the call stack and
its callback function is then
pushed to the microtask queue.
And then we return back to that
outer scope, so console.log(4),
which is just a regular log,
so this log(8).
Now, there's nothing
else on the call stack.
So the very first thing on microtask queue
is that asyncFunction body, which doesn't
do anything cuz it was that implicit
undefined or implicit return undefined.
But it does mean that in our result,
cuz so,
asyncFunction is now a resolved promise.
So you can see that the rest of that,
like immediately invoked asyncFunction and
the new Promise constructor now gets
pushed to the microtasks queue.
Cuz it means that the rest of that
function body, so the console.log(6),
will get logged eventually,
but it's just that body.
So now the first thing on the microtask
queue is the console.log(7), so
this log 7.
And now the rest of the asyncFunction
body here is executed, so
that is that console.log(6),
so that logs 6 [LAUGH].
And then finally,
this all gets popped off, and
then we have the regular task queue
that was for that setTimeout,
which is console.log(3), and
then 3 gets locked at its very last value.
Does that make any sense?
Is it kinda clear how that works?
Maybe I can also just show you,
I think it was this one.
I mean, there isn't much,
I just wanted to show you that it's
actually that value that gets logged,
let's see, node 3.
Yeah, so what I was talking about here is,
I actually always say return undefined,
but it means that here,
once this promise has resolved,
all of this gets a few
dozen microtasks here.
Same with this, so
this is why it logged 6 eventually.
But it was a bit later,
cuz it was a microtask, but
still before that set timeout because that
was the only regular task that got queued.
Hope that makes some sense at least.
>> So normal invocations then promise,
then async, microtask, and then macrotask.
>> Well, not necessarily promise, yeah,
the promise executor function or executor
function, I never know how to say that,
that is just run like a regular function.
And the asyncFunction is also synchronous
until it hits that await keyword and
the rest after is the asynchronous part.
Because of course, asynchronous functions
are just kind of like synthetic
sugar over a new Promise and
a then callback.
So the fact that that then callback was
a microtask is essentially the same as
saying everything after the await
keyword is a microtask,
it's just replicating that same behavior.
Cuz all you want is if we're awaiting a
value, we wanna make sure that we actually
have access to that value after
the wait keyword, which is essentially
the same as saying .then and then res,
and then doing something with res.
But I think the way that,
that was first phrased was not necessarily
correct cuz it's not always the case.
Does that make sense?
It's not then a function, then a promise,
depends on the promise and
if it resolves right away, or
rejects, or is always pending.
>> So setTimeout won't always be last?
>> Well, tasks on the regular task queue,
they will always be after a microtask.
And also, microtasks can schedule
other microtasks, which means that,
if you just have a microtask that's always
returning another microtask, that regular
task will never stand a chance, that
will never get added to the call stack.
But, yes, anything that gets
added to that task queue
will always be executed
last in the event loop.
Unless that task then
schedules another microtask,
cuz then it's like task micro task, task.
Yeah, I feel like I'm just making it so
much worse now, but
something important to remember, so
microtask and schedule another microtask.
And then they will still get all
invoked before the first task is
added to the call stack.
All right, so
this is gonna be the last question kind
of about the event loop like this.
So after this you're you don't have
to worry about it anymore, but
choose the correct logs once again.
So we have an immediately
invoked asyncFunction.
And within an asyncFunction we have
an arrow asyncFunction that just
returns the string asyncFunc.
We have a promise, a variable that is the
new Promise constructor logging promise.
Notice, here how we don't result from
that promise by the way, just yell.
We have a then call back that logs than
a regular log that logs async body,
queue microtask, and the results,
that's the promise to all.
Just know the promise to all method is you
can use that to run multiple promises at
the same time, and then it'll give
a result once they've all resolved.
And then we have
the console.log script that runs
after that asyncFunction is finished and
running.
So, what would be the correct logs?
Would it be promise async body, script
queueMicrotask, promise Async body script,
then queueMicrotask?
Script, promise, async body, then
queueMicrotasks or, yeah, honestly, I feel
like if I say all the options out loud
it's It's just gonna be work of using.
Yeah, or D or E.
So the correct answer here is A,
first, promise,
than async body, scripts, queueMicrotask.
So first,
the asyncFunction is invoked right away.
So that's,
first gets added to the call stack.
Then we have the new Promise constructor,
also gets added to the call stack, and
its body runs synchronously.
So console.log promise gets added to
the call stack, and this logs promise.
Note here that we don't resolve,
which means that the then method or
the then callback never gets called,
cuz that only gets called when we
actually resolve from the promise.
So this just gets ignored, that part.
Then the next part is console.log
async body, so async body gets logged.
Then there's a queueMicrotask,
gets added to the call stack and
queues that microtask.
And then we have the promise.all.
We already have that promise that's
still pending cuz we never resolved, but
asyncFunction is called and this just
returns the string so nothing gets logged.
It's just returning, it's resolving with
that string as its value by not logging
anything, so we don't really care.
Then here we have console.log,
sorry, there was something wrong with
the animation there, the queueMicrotask
trips to be in their previous one as well.
But then, we have console.log(script), so
it gets pushed to the call stack script.
And then, the call stack is empty,
so queueMicrotask gets added, and
that gets logged.
And then we finish the script, make sense?
So this would have been different if we
returned a value here, or a resolve here,
cuz then,
the then would've been called, and
then would've been added
to the microtask queue.
But we didn't, so this never runs.
Yeah, just something to remember.
>> Can a race condition happen here?
>> With Promise.all?
I believe so, I mean,
it depends on when they resolve.
Yeah, I mean, that's not really in
the scope of this specific question,
cuz one of them is always pending,
but yeah,
with Promise.all that's known
to happen as far as I know.